Article
Detecting hallucinations in large language
models using semantic entropy
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07421-0 Sebastian Farquhar1,2 ✉, Jannik Kossen1,2, Lorenz Kuhn1,2 & Yarin Gal1
Received: 17 July 2023
Accepted: 12 April 2024 Large language model (LLM) systems, such as ChatGPT1 or Gemini2, can show
impressive reasoning and question-answering capabilities but often ‘hallucinate’
Published online: 19 June 2024
false outputs and unsubstantiated answers3,4. Answering unreliably or without the
Open access
necessary information prevents adoption in diverse fields, with problems including
Check for updates fabrication of legal precedents5 or untrue facts in news articles6 and even posing a
risk to human life in medical domains such as radiology7. Encouraging truthfulness
through supervision or reinforcement has been only partially successful8. Researchers
need a general method for detecting hallucinations in LLMs that works even with new
and unseen questions to which humans might not know the answer. Here we develop
new methods grounded in statistics, proposing entropy-based uncertainty estimators
for LLMs to detect a subset of hallucinations—confabulations—which are arbitrary and
incorrect generations. Our method addresses the fact that one idea can be expressed
in many ways by computing uncertainty at the level of meaning rather than specific
sequences of words. Our method works across datasets and tasks without a priori
knowledge of the task, requires no task-specific data and robustly generalizes to new
tasks not seen before. By detecting when a prompt is likely to produce a confabulation,
our method helps users understand when they must take extra care with LLMs and
opens up new possibilities for using LLMs that are otherwise prevented by their
unreliability.
‘Hallucinations’ are a critical problem9 for natural language genera- We show how to detect confabulations by developing a quantita-
tion systems using large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT1 or tive measure of when an input is likely to cause an LLM to generate
Gemini2, because users cannot trust that any given output is correct. arbitrary and ungrounded answers. Detecting confabulations allows
Hallucinations are often defined as LLMs generating “content systems built on LLMs to avoid answering questions likely to cause
that is nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided source content”9–11 confabulations, to make users aware of the unreliability of answers
but they have come to include a vast array of failures of faithfulness to a question or to supplement the LLM with more grounded search
and factuality. We focus on a subset of hallucinations which we call or retrieval. This is essential for the critical emerging field of free-
‘confabulations’12 for which LLMs fluently make claims that are both form generation in which naive approaches, suited to closed vocabu-
wrong and arbitrary—by which we mean that the answer is sensitive lary and multiple choice, fail. Past work on uncertainty for LLMs has
to irrelevant details such as random seed. For example, when asked a focused on simpler settings, such as classifiers16,17 and regressors18,19,
medical question “What is the target of Sotorasib?” an LLM confabu- whereas the most exciting applications of LLMs relate to free-form
lates by sometimes answering KRASG12 ‘C’ (correct) and other times generations.
KRASG12 ‘D’ (incorrect) despite identical instructions. We distinguish The term hallucination in the context of machine learning originally
this from cases in which a similar ‘symptom’ is caused by the following comes from filling in ungrounded details, either as a deliberate strat-
different mechanisms: when LLMs are consistently wrong as a result of egy20 or as a reliability problem4. The appropriateness of the meta-
being trained on erroneous data such as common misconceptions13; phor has been questioned as promoting undue anthropomorphism21.
when the LLM ‘lies’ in pursuit of a reward14; or systematic failures of Although we agree that metaphor must be used carefully with LLMs22,
reasoning or generalization. We believe that combining these dis- the widespread adoption of the term hallucination reflects the fact
tinct mechanisms in the broad category hallucination is unhelpful. that it points to an important phenomenon. This work represents a
Our method makes progress on a portion of the problem of providing step towards making that phenomenon more precise.
scalable oversight15 by detecting confabulations that people might To detect confabulations, we use probabilistic tools to define and
otherwise find plausible. However, it does not guarantee factuality then measure the ‘semantic’ entropy of the generations of an LLM—an
because it does not help when LLM outputs are systematically bad. Nev- entropy that is computed over meanings of sentences. High entropy
ertheless, we significantly improve question-answering accuracy for corresponds to high uncertainty23–25—so semantic entropy is one way
state-of-the-art LLMs, revealing that confabulations are a great source of to estimate semantic uncertainties. Semantic uncertainty, the broader
error at present. category of measures we introduce, could be operationalized with other
1OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2These authors contributed equally: Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn. ✉e-mail: sebfar@gmail.com
Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 625
Article
a Semantic entropy
Paris Paris
It’s Paris It’s Paris
Where is the France’s capital Paris France’s capital Paris
Eiffel Tower? Rome Rome
It’s Rome It’s Rome
Berlin Berlin
b Application to FactualBio paragraphs
User: Question
Who is Freddie Frith?
Generate answers and Semantic entropy
Factoid decomposition Possible questions cluster by meaning probability
Freddie Frith was an Q1 of M for Fact 1: Five-time motorcycle racing world...
English motorcycle What notable
road racer who accomplishments Motorcycle road racing world...
be in c a b m ot e h a p r c e h - a W m o p rl i d on Fred F d a ie c t F 1 ri t o h f w 7 a : s an did F ac re h d ie d v ie e ? Frith Motorcycle racing champion...
War II and post-war English motorcycle
eras. He won the road racer Motorcycle racing. 1935 and 1937 Grand Q2 of M for Fact 1:
Prix motorcycle What was Freddie He was a world champion motorcycle... racing European Frith known for?
Championships. He was president of the
After retiring Auto Cycle Union...
from competition,
he became the
president of the Auto Q1 of M for Fact 6: 1909
Cycle Union, the When was Freddie 1909
governing body of Frith’s year of
r B ac ri i t n is g h . H m e o w to a rc s y a c l l s e o Fact 6 of 7 : birth? 1909
an accomplished Frith was born
motorcycle dealer in 1911 30 May 1909
Q2 of M for Fact 6:
and manufacturer.
Frith was born in 1911 When was Freddie 29 March 1909
Frith born?
and died in 1988. 26 October 1911
measures of uncertainty, such as mutual information, instead. Entropy well as being used to measure factuality in abstractive summarization30,
in free-form generation is normally hard to measure because answers especially when applied at the right granularity31.
might mean the same thing (be semantically equivalent) despite being Semantic entropy detects confabulations in free-form text genera-
expressed differently (being syntactically or lexically distinct). This tion across a range of language models and domains, without previous
causes naive estimates of entropy or other lexical variation scores26 to domain knowledge. Our evaluations cover question answering in trivia
be misleadingly high when the same correct answer might be written knowledge (TriviaQA32), general knowledge (SQuAD 1.1; ref. 33), life
in many ways without changing its meaning. sciences (BioASQ34) and open-domain natural questions (NQ-Open35)
By contrast, our semantic entropy moves towards estimating the derived from actual queries to Google Search36. In addition, seman-
entropy of the distribution of meanings of free-form answers to ques- tic entropy detects confabulations in mathematical word problems
tions, insofar as that is possible, rather than the distribution over the (SVAMP37) and in a biography-generation dataset, FactualBio, accom-
‘tokens’ (words or word-pieces) which LLMs natively represent. This panying this paper.
can be seen as a kind of semantic consistency check27 for random seed Our results for TriviaQA, SQuAD, BioASQ, NQ-Open and SVAMP are
variation. An overview of our approach is provided in Fig. 1 and a worked all evaluated context-free and involve sentence-length answers (96 ± 70
example in Supplementary Table 1. characters, mean ± s.d.) and use LLaMA 2 Chat (7B, 13B and 70B param-
Intuitively, our method works by sampling several possible answers eters)38, Falcon Instruct (7B and 40B)39 and Mistral Instruct (7B)40. In the
to each question and clustering them algorithmically into answers that Supplementary Information, we further consider short-phrase-length
have similar meanings, which we determine on the basis of whether answers. Results for FactualBio (442 ± 122 characters) use GPT-4
answers in the same cluster entail each other bidirectionally28. That (ref. 1). At the time of writing, GPT-4 (ref. 1) did not expose output prob-
is, if sentence A entails that sentence B is true and vice versa, then we abilities41 or hidden states, although it does now. As a result, we propose
consider them to be in the same semantic cluster. We measure entail- a discrete approximation of our estimator for semantic entropy which
ment using both general-purpose LLMs and natural language inference allows us to run experiments without access to output probabilities,
(NLI) tools developed specifically for detecting entailment for which which we use for all GPT-4 results in this paper and which performs
we show direct evaluations in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3 and Sup- similarly well.
plementary Fig. 1. Textual entailment has previously been shown to Our confabulation detection with semantic entropy is more robust
correlate with faithfulness10 in the context of factual consistency29 as to user inputs from previously unseen domains than methods which
626 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
noitalubafnoc
ylekil
toN
noitalubafnoc
ylekiL
Misleadingly high naive entropy Low semantic entropy
LLM answers Probability LLM answers Probability
Cluster
answers by
semantic
User: Question Generate meaning
LLLLMM LLLLMM
Generate
LLLLMM
Fig. 1 | Overview of semantic entropy and confabulation detection. a, Naive factoids. For each factoid, an LLM generates questions to which that factoid
entropy-based uncertainty measures variation in the exact answers, treating might have been the answer. The original LLM then samples M possible answers
‘Paris’, ‘It’s Paris’ and ‘France’s capital Paris’ as different. But this is unsuitable to these questions. Finally, we compute the semantic entropy over the answers
for language tasks for which sometimes different answers mean the same to each specific question, including the original factoid. Confabulations are
things. Our semantic entropy clusters answers which share meanings before indicated by high average semantic entropy for questions associated with that
computing the entropy. A low semantic entropy shows that the LLM is confident factoid. Here, semantic entropy classifies Fact 1 as probably not a confabulation
about the meaning. b, Semantic entropy can also detect confabulations in because generations often mean the same thing, despite very different
longer passages. We automatically decompose a long generated answer into wordings, which a naive entropy would have missed.
Semantic entropy Naive entropy Embedding regression
Discrete semantic entropy P(True), ref. 24 Embedding regression - OOD
0.8 0.8 0.8
0.7 0.7 0.7
0.6 0.6 0.6
0.5 0.5 0.5
0.4 0.4 0.4
0.3 0.3 0.3
AUROC AURAC AUROC AURAC AUROC AURAC
LLaMA 2 Chat 7B LLaMA 2 Chat 13B LLaMA 2 Chat 70B
0.8 0.8 0.8
0.7 0.7 0.7
0.6 0.6 0.6
0.5 0.5 0.5
0.4 0.4 0.4
0.3 0.3 0.3
AUROC AURAC AUROC AURAC AUROC AURAC
Falcon 7B Instruct Falcon 40B Instruct Mistral 7B Instruct
Fig. 2 | Detecting confabulations in sentence-length generations. Semantic performance improvement of a system that refuses to answer questions which
entropy outperforms leading baselines and naive entropy. AUROC (scored on are judged likely to cause confabulations. Results are an average over five
the y-axes) measures how well methods predict LLM mistakes, which correlate datasets, with individual metrics provided in the Supplementary Information.
with confabulations. AURAC (likewise scored on the y-axes) measures the
aim to ‘learn’ how to detect confabulations from a set of example dem-
Detecting confabulations in QA and math
onstrations. Our method is unsupervised, meaning that we do not
need labelled examples of confabulations. By contrast, supervised In Fig. 2, we show that both semantic entropy and its discrete approxi-
methods detect confabulations by learning patterns behind examples mation outperform our best baselines for sentence-length generations.
of confabulations, assuming that future questions preserve these pat- These results are averaged across datasets and provide the actual scores
terns. But this assumption is often untrue in new situations or with on the held-out evaluation dataset. We report the raw average score
confabulations that human overseers are unable to identify (com- across held-out evaluation datasets without standard error because
pare Fig. 17 of ref. 24). As a strong supervised baseline, we compare the distributional characteristics are more a property of the models
to an embedding regression method inspired by ref. 24 which trains and datasets selected than the method. Consistency of relative results
a logistic regression classifier to predict whether the model correctly across different datasets is a stronger indicator of variation in this case.
answered a question on the basis of the final ‘embedding’ (hidden state) Semantic entropy greatly outperforms the naive estimation of uncer-
of the LLM. We also use the P(True) method24 which looks at the prob- tainty using entropy: computing the entropy of the length-normalized
ability with which an LLM predicts that the next token is ‘True’ when joint probability of the token sequences. Naive entropy estimation
few-shot prompted to compare a main answer with ‘brainstormed’ ignores the fact that token probabilities also express the uncertainty of
alternatives. the model over phrasings that do not change the meaning of an output.
Confabulations contribute substantially to incorrect answers given Our methods also outperform the supervised embedding regression
by language models. We show that semantic entropy can be used to pre- method both in- and out-of-distribution. In pale-yellow bars we show
dict many incorrect model answers and to improve question-answering that embedding regression performance deteriorates when its train-
accuracy by refusing to answer those questions the model is uncertain ing data do not match the deployment distribution—which mirrors the
about. Corresponding to these two uses, we evaluate two main metrics. common real-world case in which there is a distribution shift between
First, the widely used area under the receiver operating characteristic training and deployment42—the plotted value is the average metric for
(AUROC) curve for the binary event that a given answer is incorrect. embedding regression trained on one of the four ‘off-distribution’
This measure captures both precision and recall and ranges from datasets for that evaluation. This is critical because reliable uncertainty
0 to 1, with 1 representing a perfect classifier and 0.5 representing is most important when the data distribution shifts. Semantic entropy
an un-informative classifier. We also show a new measure, the area also outperforms P(True) which is supervised ‘in-context’; that is, it is
under the ‘rejection accuracy’ curve (AURAC). This studies the case in adapted to the deployment task with a few training examples provided
which the confabulation detection score is used to refuse to answer in the LLM prompt itself. The discrete variant of semantic entropy per-
the questions judged most likely to cause confabulations. Rejection forms similarly to our standard estimator, despite not requiring exact
accuracy is the accuracy of the answers of the model on the remaining output probabilities.
questions and the area under this curve is a summary statistic over Averaged across the 30 combinations of tasks and models we study,
many thresholds (representative threshold accuracies are provided in semantic entropy achieves the best AUROC value of 0.790 whereas
Supplementary Material). The AURAC captures the accuracy improve- naive entropy (0.691), P(True) (0.698) and the embedding regression
ment which users would experience if semantic entropy was used to baseline (0.687) lag behind it. Semantic entropy performs well con-
filter out questions causing the highest entropy. sistently, with stable performance (between 0.78 and 0.81 AUROC)
Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 627
Article
Table 1 | Semantic entropy applied to examples
Question Model answer Reference Generations for entropy Prediction
answer
Semantic entropy Naive entropy
• All the above are under the industrial sector of
Refineries, process Refineries, process construction.
chemical, power chemical, power
Industrial or heavy • The refineries, process chemical, power
generation, mills and generation, mills and
civil or heavy generation, mills and manufacturing plants are Not confabulation Confabulation
manufacturing plants manufacturing plants
engineering. under the industrial sector of construction.
are under what sector are under the industrial
of construction? sector of construction. • These are all under the heavy industrial sector
of construction.
• The stard10 protein plays a crucial role
in regulating the dynamics of the actin
cytoskeleton and cell adhesion during cell
The stard10 protein migration and cell division.
functions as a negative
• The stard10 protein functions as a negative
regulator of the mTOR
What is the function of STARD10 is a lipid regulator of the meiotic recombination process,
pathway by inhibiting Confabulation Confabulation
the stard10 protein? transfer protein. specifically by inhibiting the activity of the Dmc1
the activity of the
recombinase enzyme.
mTORC1 and mTORC2
complexes. • The stard10 protein functions as a regulator of
lipid metabolism, promoting the breakdown of
lipids in the liver and inhibiting their synthesis in
the liver and adipose tissue.
• ‘Fado’ is the national music of Portugal.
Of which European
country is ‘fado’ the Portugal. Portugal. • ‘Fado’ is the national music of Portugal. Not confabulation Not confabulation
national music?
• Fado is the national music of Portugal.
• BSkyB’s digital service was launched in 1998.
When was BSkyB’s BSkyB’s digital • BSkyB’s digital service was launched on
digital service 1 October 1998. service was 1 October 1998. Confabulation Not confabulation
launched? launched in 1998.
• BSkyB’s digital service was launched on
1 October 1998.
The first row of Table 1 demonstrates a case in which semantic entropy correctly predicts that an answer is not a confabulation if naive entropy would incorrectly predict a confabulation. All of
the generations from the model mean the same thing as each other so they are clustered together despite using different phrasings. The second row provides an example in which semantic
entropy and naive entropy would both correctly predict a confabulation, in which each generation is both lexically distinct and also means something different. The third row is an example in
which semantic entropy and naive entropy would both correctly predict no confabulation because the multiple generations are almost lexically identical. The fourth row gives an example
in which semantic entropy might fail but naive entropy might succeed. In our experiment, semantic entropy clustered the answers into those which provided a specific date and those which
gave only a year and treated the model as ‘uncertain’. This highlights the importance of context in semantic clustering. The examples come from LLaMA 2 Chat 70B generations for SQuAD,
BioASQ and TriviaQA.
across the different model families (LLaMA, Falcon and Mistral) and entropy and naive entropy both correctly predict the presence of
scales (from 7B to 70B parameters) which we study (we report summary confabulations when the form and meaning vary together (second
statistics for each dataset and model as before). Although semantic row) and predict the absence of confabulations when the form and
entropy outperforms the baselines across all model sizes, P(True) meaning are both constant across several resampled generations
seems to improve with model size, suggesting that it might become (third row). In the final row, we give an example in which semantic
more competitive for very capable honest models in settings that the entropy is erroneously high as a result of overly sensitive semantic
model understands well (which are, however, not the most important clustering relative to the reference answer. Our clustering method
cases to have good uncertainty). We use ten generations to compute distinguishes the answers which provide a precise date from those
entropy, selected using analysis in Supplementary Fig. 2. Further which only provide a year. For some contexts that would have been
results for short-phrase generations are described in Supplementary correct but in this context the distinction between the specific day
Figs. 7–10. and the year is probably irrelevant. This highlights the importance
The results in Fig. 2 offer a lower bound on the effectiveness of seman- of context and judgement in clustering, especially in subtle cases, as
tic entropy at detecting confabulations. These evaluations determine well as the shortcomings of evaluating against fixed reference answers
whether semantic entropy and baseline methods can detect when the which do not capture the open-ended flexibility of conversational
answers of the model are incorrect (which we validate against human deployments of LLMs.
correctness evaluations in Supplementary Table 4). In addition to errors
from confabulations (arbitrary incorrectness), this also includes other
Detecting confabulations in biographies
types of mistakes for which semantic entropy is not suited, such as
consistent errors learned from the training data. The fact that methods Semantic entropy is most natural for sentences that express a single
such as embedding regression are able to spot other kinds of errors, not proposition but the idea of semantic equivalence is trickier to apply to
just confabulations, but still are outperformed by semantic entropy, longer passages which express many propositions which might only
suggests that confabulations are a principal category of errors for agree partially43. Nevertheless, we can use semantic entropy to detect
actual generations. confabulations in longer generations, such as entire paragraphs of text.
Examples of questions and answers from TriviaQA, SQuAD and To show this, we develop a dataset of biographical generations from
BioASQ, for LLaMA 2 Chat 70B, are shown in Table 1. These illustrate GPT-4 (v.0613) for 21 individuals notable enough to have their own
how only semantic entropy detects when the meaning is constant Wikipedia page but without extensive online biographies. From each
but the form varies (the first row of the table) whereas semantic biography generated by GPT-4, we automatically extract propositional
628 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Discrete semantic entropy lack of LLM knowledge. These are a substantial portion of the failures at
0.8 P(True), ref. 24 variant present and will continue even as models grow in capabilities because
Self-check baseline
situations and cases that humans cannot reliably supervise will persist.
Confabulations are a particularly noteworthy failure mode for question
0.7
answering but appear in other domains too. Semantic entropy needs
no previous domain knowledge and we expect that algorithmic adap-
0.6
tations to other problems will allow similar advances in, for example,
abstractive summarization. In addition, extensions to alternative input
0.5 variations such as rephrasing or counterfactual scenarios would allow
a similar method to act as a form of cross-examination44 for scalable
0.4 oversight through debate45.
AUROC AURAC 80% 90% 95% 100% The success of semantic entropy at detecting errors suggests that
Rejection accuracy LLMs are even better at “knowing what they don’t know” than was
argued by ref. 24—they just don’t know they know what they don’t
Fig. 3 | Detecting GPT-4 confabulations in paragraph-length biographies.
know. Our method explicitly does not directly address situations in
The discrete variant of our semantic entropy estimator outperforms baselines
which LLMs are confidently wrong because they have been trained
both when measured by AUROC and AURAC metrics (scored on the y-axis). The
with objectives that systematically produce dangerous behaviour,
AUROC and AURAC are substantially higher than for both baselines. At above
cause systematic reasoning errors or are systematically mislead-
80% of questions being answered, semantic entropy has the highest accuracy.
Only when the top 20% of answers judged most likely to be confabulations are ing the user. We believe that these represent different underlying
rejected does the answer accuracy on the remainder for the P(True) baseline mechanisms—despite similar ‘symptoms’—and need to be handled
exceed semantic entropy. separately.
One exciting aspect of our approach is the way it makes use of clas-
sical probabilistic machine learning methods and adapts them to the
factual claims about the individual (150 factual claims in total), which unique properties of modern LLMs and free-form language generation.
we manually label as true or false. We hope to inspire a fruitful exchange of well-studied methods and
Applying semantic entropy to this problem is challenging. Naively, emerging new problems by highlighting the importance of meaning
one might simply regenerate each sentence (conditioned on the text when addressing language-based machine learning problems.
so far) and then compute semantic entropy over these regenerations.
However, the resampled sentences often target different aspects of
Online content
the biography: for example, one time describing family and the next
time profession. This is analogous to the original problem semantic Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
entropy was designed to resolve: the model is uncertain about the right ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
ordering of facts, not about the facts themselves. To address this, we edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions
break down the entire paragraph into factual claims and reconstruct and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability
questions which might have been answered by those claims. Only then are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07421-0.
do we apply semantic entropy (Fig. 1) by generating three new answers
to each question (selected with analysis in Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4)
1. GPT-4 technical report. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 (2023).
and computing the semantic entropy over those generations plus the
2. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
original factual claim. We aggregate these by averaging the semantic 2312.11805 (2023).
entropy over all the questions to get an uncertainty score for each 3. Xiao, Y. & Wang, W. Y. On hallucination and predictive uncertainty in conditional language
generation. In Proc. 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
proposition, which we use to detect confabulations. Unaggregated
Computational Linguistics 2734–2744 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021).
results are shown in Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6. 4. Rohrbach, A., Hendricks, L. A., Burns, K., Darrell, T. & Saenko, K. Object hallucination in
As GPT-4 did not allow access to the probability of the generation image captioning. In Proc. 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (eds Riloff, E., Chiang, D., Hockenmaier, J. & Tsujii, J.) 4035–4045 (Association
at the time of writing, we use a discrete variant of semantic entropy for Computational Linguistics, 2018).
which makes the further approximation that we can infer a discrete 5. Weiser, B. Lawyer who used ChatGPT faces penalty for made up citations. The New York
empirical distribution over semantic meaning clusters from only the Times (8 Jun 2023).
6. Opdahl, A. L. et al. Trustworthy journalism through AI. Data Knowl. Eng. 146, 102182
generations (Methods). This allows us to compute semantic entropy (2023).
using only the black-box outputs of an LLM. However, we were unable 7. Shen, Y. et al. ChatGPT and other large language models are double-edged swords.
to compute the naive entropy baseline, the standard semantic entropy Radiology 307, e230163 (2023).
8. Schulman, J. Reinforcement learning from human feedback: progress and challenges.
estimator or the embedding regression baseline for GPT-4 without Presented at the Berkeley EECS Colloquium. YouTube www.youtube.com/
output probabilities and embeddings. watch?v=hhiLw5Q_UFg (2023).
In Fig. 3 we show that the discrete variant of semantic entropy effec- 9. Ji, Z. et al. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Comput. Surv.55,
248 (2023).
tively detects confabulations on this dataset. Its AUROC and AURAC are 10. Maynez, J., Narayan, S., Bohnet, B. & McDonald, R. On faithfulness and factuality in
higher than either a simple ‘self-check’ baseline—which just asks the abstractive summarization. In Proc. 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (eds Jurafsky, D., Chai, J., Schluter, N. & Tetreault, J.) 1906–1919
LLM whether the factoid is likely to be true—or a variant of P(True) which
(Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020).
has been adapted to work for the paragraph-length setting. Discrete 11. Filippova, K. Controlled hallucinations: learning to generate faithfully from noisy data.
semantic entropy has better rejection accuracy performance until In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 (eds Webber,
B., Cohn, T., He, Y. & Liu, Y.) 864–870 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020).
20% of the questions have been rejected at which point P(True) has
12. Berrios, G. Confabulations: a conceptual history. J. Hist. Neurosci. 7, 225–241 (1998).
a narrow edge. This indicates that the questions predicted to cause 13. Lin, S., Hilton, J. & Evans, O. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in words.
confabulations are indeed more likely to be wrong. Transact. Mach. Learn. Res. (2022).
14. Evans, O. et al. Truthful AI: developing and governing AI that does not lie. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06674 (2021).
15. Amodei, D. et al. Concrete problems in AI safety. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
Discussion 1606.06565 (2016).
16. Jiang, Z., Araki, J., Ding, H. & Neubig, G. How can we know when language models know?
Our probabilistic approach, accounting for semantic equivalence,
On the calibration of language models for question answering. Transact. Assoc. Comput.
detects an important class of hallucinations: those that are caused by a Linguist. 9, 962–977 (2021).
Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 629
Article
17. Desai, S. & Durrett, G. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proc. 2020 Conference 34. Tsatsaronis, G. et al. An overview of the BIOASQ large-scale biomedical semantic
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (eds Webber, B., Cohn, T., indexing and question answering competition. BMC Bioinformatics 16, 138 (2015).
He, Y. & Liu, Y.) 295–302 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020). 35. Lee, K., Chang, M.-W. & Toutanova, K. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised open domain
18. Glushkova, T., Zerva, C., Rei, R. & Martins, A. F. Uncertainty-aware machine translation question answering. In Proc. 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
evaluation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 (eds Linguistics 6086–6096 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019).
Moens, M-F., Huang, X., Specia, L. & Yih, S.) 3920–3938 (Association for Computational 36. Kwiatkowski, T. et al. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research.
Linguistics, 2021). Transact. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 7, 452–466 (2019).
19. Wang, Y., Beck, D., Baldwin, T. & Verspoor, K. Uncertainty estimation and reduction of 37. Patel, A., Bhattamishra, S. & Goyal, N. Are NLP models really able to solve simple math
pre-trained models for text regression. Transact. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 10, 680–696 word problems? In Proc. 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
(2022). for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (eds Toutanova, K. et al.)
20. Baker, S. & Kanade, T. Hallucinating faces. In Proc. Fourth IEEE International Conference 2080–2094 (Assoc. Comp. Linguistics, 2021).
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. 83–88 (IEEE, Catalogue no PR00580, 38. Touvron, H. et al. Llama 2: open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Preprint at
2002). https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288 (2023).
21. Eliot, L. AI ethics lucidly questioning this whole hallucinating AI popularized trend that 39. Penedo, G. et al. The RefinedWeb dataset for Falcon LLM: outperforming curated
has got to stop. Forbes Magazine (24 August 2022). corpora with web data, and web data only. In Proc. 36th Conference on Neural
22. Shanahan, M. Talking about large language models. Commun. Assoc. Comp. Machinery Information Processing Systems (eds Oh, A. et al.) 79155–79172 (Curran Associates,
67, 68–79 (2024). 2023)
23. MacKay, D. J. C. Information-based objective functions for active data selection. Neural 40. Jiang, A. Q. et al. Mistral 7B. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825 (2023).
Comput. 4, 590–604 (1992). 41. Manakul, P., Liusie, A. & Gales, M. J. F. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-Resource Black-Box
24. Kadavath, S. et al. Language models (mostly) know what they know. Preprint at https:// hallucination detection for generative large language models. In Findings of the
arxiv.org/abs/2207.05221 (2022). Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 (eds Bouamor, H., Pino, J. & Bali, K.)
25. Lindley, D. V. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. Ann. Math. 9004–9017 (Assoc. Comp. Linguistics, 2023).
Stat. 27, 986–1005 (1956). 42. Mukhoti, J., Kirsch, A., van Amersfoort, J., Torr, P. H. & Gal, Y. Deep deterministic
26. Xiao, T. Z., Gomez, A. N. & Gal, Y. Wat zei je? Detecting out-of-distribution translations with uncertainty: a new simple baseline. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
variational transformers. In Workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning at the Conference on Pattern Recognition 24384–24394 (Computer Vision Foundation, 2023).
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS, Vancouver, 2019). 43. Schuster, T., Chen, S., Buthpitiya, S., Fabrikant, A. & Metzler, D. Stretching sentence-pair
27. Christiano, P., Cotra, A. & Xu, M. Eliciting Latent Knowledge (Alignment Research NLI models to reason over long documents and clusters. In Findings of the Association for
Center, 2021); https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WwsnJQstPq91_Yh-Ch2XRL8H_ Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 (eds Goldberg, Y. et al.) 394–412 (Association for
EpsnjrC1dwZXR37PC8/edit. Computational Linguistics, 2022).
28. Negri, M., Bentivogli, L., Mehdad, Y., Giampiccolo, D. & Marchetti, A. Divide and conquer: 44. Barnes, B. & Christiano, P. Progress on AI Safety via Debate. AI Alignment Forum
crowdsourcing the creation of cross-lingual textual entailment corpora. In Proc. 2011 www.alignmentforum.org/posts/Br4xDbYu4Frwrb64a/writeup-progress-on-ai-safety-via-
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 670–679 (Association debate-1 (2020).
for Computational Linguistics, 2011). 45. Irving, G., Christiano, P. & Amodei, D. AI safety via debate. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
29. Honovich, O. et al. TRUE: Re-evaluating factual consistency evaluation. In Proc. Second abs/1805.00899 (2018).
DialDoc Workshop on Document-grounded Dialogue and Conversational Question
Answering 161–175 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
30. Falke, T., Ribeiro, L. F. R., Utama, P. A., Dagan, I. & Gurevych, I. Ranking generated
published maps and institutional affiliations.
summaries by correctness: an interesting but challenging application for natural
language inference. In Proc. 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 2214–2220 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019). Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
31. Laban, P., Schnabel, T., Bennett, P. N. & Hearst, M. A. SummaC: re-visiting NLI-based 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
models for inconsistency detection in summarization. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 10, and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
163–177 (2022). credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
32. Joshi, M., Choi, E., Weld, D. S. & Zettlemoyer, L. TriviaQA: a large scale distantly supervised and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proc. 55th Annual Meeting of the included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
Association for Computational Linguistics 1601–1611 (Association for Computational to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
Linguistics. 2017). intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
33. Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K. & Liang, P. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
compression of text. In Proc. 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Processing (eds Su, J., Duh, K. & Carreras, X.) 2383–2392 (Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2016). © The Author(s) 2024
630 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Methods
Principles of semantic uncertainty
Semantic entropy as a strategy for overcoming confabulation builds If we naively calculate the predictive entropy directly from the probabil-
on probabilistic tools for uncertainty estimation. It can be applied ities of the generated sequence of tokens, we conflate the uncertainty
directly to any LLM or similar foundation model without requiring any of the model over the meaning of its answer with the uncertainty over
modifications to the architecture. Our ‘discrete’ variant of semantic the exact tokens used to express that meaning. For example, even if the
uncertainty can be applied even when the predicted probabilities for model is confident in the meaning of a generation, there are still usually
the generations are not available, for example, because access to the many different ways for phrasing that generation without changing its
internals of the model is limited. meaning. For the purposes of detecting confabulations, the uncertainty
In this section we introduce background on probabilistic methods of the LLM over meanings is more important than the uncertainty over
and uncertainty in machine learning, discuss how it applies to language the exact tokens used to express those meanings.
models and then discuss our contribution, semantic entropy, in detail. Our semantic uncertainty method therefore seeks to estimate only
the uncertainty the LLM has over the meaning of its generation, not
Background the choice of words. To do this, we introduce an algorithm that clusters
Uncertainty and machine learning. We aim to detect confabulations model generations by meaning and subsequently calculates semantic
in LLMs, using the principle that the model will be uncertain about uncertainty. At a high level this involves three steps:
generations for which its output is going to be arbitrary. 1. Generation: sample output sequences of tokens from the predictive
One measure of uncertainty is the predictive entropy of the output distribution of a LLM given a context x.
distribution, which measures the information one has about the output 2. Clustering: cluster sequences by their meaning using our clustering
given the input25. The predictive entropy (PE) for an input sentence x algorithm based on bidirectional entailment.
is the conditional entropy (H) of the output random variable Y with 3. Entropy estimation: estimate semantic entropy by summing prob-
realization y given x, abilities of sequences that share a meaning following equation (2)
and compute their entropy.
PE(x)=H(Y∣x)=−∑P(y∣x)lnP(y∣x).
(1) Generating a set of answers from the model. Given some context x
y as input to the LLM, we sample M sequences, {s(1), …, s(M)} and record
their token probabilities, {P(s(1)∣x), …, P(s(M)∣x)}. We sample all our gen-
A low predictive entropy indicates an output distribution which is erations from a single model, varying only the random seed used for
heavily concentrated whereas a high predictive entropy indicates that sampling from the token probabilities. We do not observe the method
many possible outputs are similarly likely. to be particularly sensitive to details of the sampling scheme. In our
implementation, we sample at temperature 1 using nucleus sampling
Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. We do not distinguish between (P = 0.9) (ref. 49) and top-K sampling (K = 50) (ref. 50). We also sample
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in our analysis. Researchers some- a single generation at low temperature (0.1) as an estimate of the ‘best
times separate aleatoric uncertainty (uncertainty in the underlying generation’ of the model to the context, which we use to assess the
data distribution) from epistemic uncertainty (caused by having only accuracy of the model. (A lower sampling temperature increases the
limited information)46. Further advances in uncertainty estimation probability of sampling the most likely tokens).
which separate these kinds of uncertainty would enhance the potential
for our semantic uncertainty approach by allowing extensions beyond Clustering by semantic equivalence. To estimate semantic entropy
entropy. we need to cluster generated outputs from the model into groups of
outputs that mean the same thing as each other.
Joint probabilities of sequences of tokens. Generative LLMs produce This can be described using ‘semantic equivalence’ which is the rela-
strings of text by selecting tokens in sequence. Each token is a wordpiece tion that holds between two sentences when they mean the same thing.
that often represents three or four characters (though especially com- We can formalize semantic equivalence mathematically. Let the space
mon sequences and important words such as numbers typically get of tokens in a language be T. The space of all possible sequences of
their own token). To compute entropies, we need access to the prob- tokens of length N is then S ≡TN. Note that N can be made arbitrarily
N
abilities the LLM assigns to the generated sequence of tokens. The large to accommodate whatever size of sentence one can imagine and
probability of the entire sequence, s, conditioned on the context, x, is one of the tokens can be a ‘padding’ token which occurs with certainty
the product of the conditional probabilities of new tokens given past for each token after the end-of-sequence token. For some sentence
tokens, whose resulting log-probability is logP(s∣x)=∑
i
logP(s i∣s
<i
,x), s∈S
N
, composed of a sequence of tokens, s
i
∈T, there is an associ-
where s is the ith output token and s denotes the set of previous ated meaning. Theories of meaning are contested51. However, for
i <i
tokens. specific models and deployment contexts many considerations can
be set aside. Care should be taken comparing very different models
Length normalization. When comparing the log-probabilities of gen- and contexts.
erated sequences, we use ‘length normalization’, that is, we use an Let us introduce a semantic equivalence relation, E( ⋅ , ⋅ ), which holds
arithmetic mean log-probability,
N
1 ∑
i
NlogP(s i∣s
<i
,x), instead of the for any two sentences that mean the same thing—we will operational-
sum. In expectation, longer sequences have lower joint likelihoods ize this presently. Recall that an equivalence relation is any reflexive,
because of the conditional independence of the token probabilities47. symmetric and transitive relation and that any equivalence relation on
The joint likelihood of a sequence of length N shrinks exponentially in a set corresponds to a set of equivalence classes. Each semantic equiv-
N. Its negative log-probability therefore grows linearly in N, so longer alence class captures outputs that can be considered to express the
sentences tend to contribute more to entropy. We therefore interpret same meaning. That is, for the space of semantic equivalence classes
length-normalizing the log-probabilities when estimating the entropy C the sentences in the set c∈C can be regarded in many settings as
as asserting that the expected uncertainty of generations is independ- expressing a similar meaning such that ∀s,s′∈c:E(s,s′). So we can
ent of sentence length. Length normalization has some empirical build up these classes of semantically equivalent sentences by check-
success48, including in our own preliminary experiments, but little ing if new sentences share a meaning with any sentences we have already
theoretical justification in the literature. clustered and, if so, adding them into that class.
Article
We operationalize E( ⋅ , ⋅ ) using the idea of bidirectional entailment, from the number of generations in each cluster, disregarding the token
which has a long history in linguistics52 and natural language process- probabilities. That is, we approximate P(C i∣x) as ∑
1
M Ic
M
=Ci, the proportion
ing28,53,54. A sequence, s, means the same thing as a second sequence, of all the sampled answers which belong to that cluster. Effectively,
s′, only if the sequences entail (that is, logically imply) each other. For this just assumes that each output that was actually generated was
example, ‘The capital of France is Paris’ entails ‘Paris is the capital of equally probable—estimating the underlying distribution as the cat-
France’ and vice versa because they mean the same thing. (See later egorical empirical distribution. In the limit of M the estimator converges
for a discussion of soft equivalence and cases in which bidirectional to equation (5) by the law of large numbers. We find that discrete seman-
entailment does not guarantee equivalent meanings). tic entropy results in similar performance empirically.
Importantly, we require that the sequences mean the same thing We provide a worked example of the computation of semantic
with respect to the context—key meaning is sometimes contained in entropy in Supplementary Note 1.
the context. For example, ‘Paris’ does not entail ‘The capital of France
is Paris’ because ‘Paris’ is not a declarative sentence without context. Detecting confabulations in QA and math
But in the context of the question ‘What is the capital of France?’, the Semantic entropy is designed to detect confabulations, that is, model
one-word answer does entail the longer answer. outputs with arbitrary meaning. In our experiments, we use semantic
Detecting entailment has been the object of study of a great deal of uncertainty to predict model accuracy, demonstrating that confabula-
research in NLI55. We rely on language models to predict entailment, tions make up a notable fraction of model mistakes. We further show
such as DeBERTa-Large-MNLI56, which has been trained to predict entail- that semantic uncertainty can be used to improve model accuracy by
ment, or general-purpose LLMs such as GPT-3.5 (ref. 57), which can refusing to answer questions when semantic uncertainty is high. Last,
predict entailment given suitable prompts. semantic uncertainty can be used to give users a way to know when
We then cluster sentences according to whether they bidirection- model generations are probably unreliable.
ally entail each other using the algorithm presented in Extended Data
Fig. 1. Note that, to check if a sequence should be added to an existing Tasks. We use the datasets BioASQ34, SQuAD33, TriviaQA32, SVAMP37
cluster, it is sufficient to check if the sequence bidirectionally entails and NQ-Open35. BioASQ is a life-sciences question-answering dataset
any of the existing sequences in that cluster (we arbitrarily pick the first based on the annual challenge of the same name. The specific dataset
one), given the transitivity of semantic equivalence. If a sequence does we use is based on the QA dataset from Task B of the 2023 BioASQ
not share meaning with any existing cluster, we assign it its own cluster. challenge (11B). SQuAD is a reading comprehension dataset whose
context passages are drawn from Wikipedia and for which the answers
Computing the semantic entropy. Having determined the classes of to questions can be found in these passages. We use SQuAD 1.1 which
generated sequences that mean the same thing, we can estimate the excludes the unanswerable questions added in v.2.0 that are deliberate-
likelihood that a sequence generated by the LLM belongs to a given class ly constructed to induce mistakes so they do not in practice cause con-
by computing the sum of the probabilities of all the possible sequences fabulations to occur. TriviaQA is a trivia question-answering dataset.
of tokens which can be considered to express the same meaning as SVAMP is a word-problem maths dataset containing elementary-school
mathematical reasoning tasks. NQ-Open is a dataset of realistic ques-
P(c∣x)= ∑ P(sx)= ∑ ∏P(s i s <i ,x). (2) tions aggregated from Google Search which have been chosen to be
s∈c s∈c i answerable without reference to a source text. For each dataset, we
use 400 train examples and 400 test examples randomly sampled
Formally, this treats the output as a random variable whose event- from the original larger dataset. Note that only some of the methods
space is the space of all possible meaning-classes, C, a sub-σ-algebra of require training, for example semantic entropy does not use the train-
the standard event-space S. We can then estimate the semantic entropy ing data. If the datasets themselves are already split into train and
(SE) as the entropy over the meaning-distribution, test (or validation) samples, we sample our examples from within the
corresponding split.
SE(x)=−∑P(c∣x)logP(c∣x)
(3) All these datasets are free-form, rather than multiple choice, because
c this better captures the opportunities created by LLMs to produce
free-form sentences as answers. We refer to this default scenario as
    our ‘sentence-length’ experiments. In Supplementary Note 7, we also
=−∑ ∑ P(s∣x)log∑ P(s∣x)

. (4)
present results for confabulation detection in a ‘short-phrase’ scenario,
c s∈c  s∈c 
in which we constrain model answers on these datasets to be as concise
There is a complication which prevents direct computation: we do as possible.
not have access to every possible meaning-class c. Instead, we can only To make the problems more difficult and induce confabulations,
sample c from the sequence-generating distribution induced by the we do not provide the context passages for any of the datasets. When
model. To handle this, we estimate the expectation in equation (3) the context passages are provided, the accuracy rate is too high for
using a Rao–Blackwellized Monte Carlo integration over the semantic these datasets for the latest generations of models to meaningfully
equivalence classes C, study confabulations.
∣C∣ Models. For sentence-length generations we use: Falcon39 Instruct (7B
SE(x)≈−∑P(C i∣x)logP(C i∣x), (5)
and 40B), LLaMA 2 Chat38 (7B, 13B and 70B) and Mistral40 Instruct (7B).
i=1
where P(C i∣x)=
∑
P
c
(
P
ci
(
∣
c
x
∣x
)
)
estimates a categorical distribution over the Baselines. In addition to reporting results for semantic entropy, dis-
cluster meanings, that is, ∑
i
P(C i∣x) = 1. Without this normalization step crete semantic entropy and naive entropy, we consider two strong
cluster ‘probabilities’ could exceed one because of length normaliza- baselines.
tion, resulting in degeneracies. Equation (5) is the estimator giving our Embedding regression is a supervised baseline inspired by the P(IK)
main method that we refer to as semantic entropy throughout the text. method24. In that paper, the authors fine-tune their proprietary LLM on
For scenarios in which the sequence probabilities are not available, a dataset of questions to predict whether the model would have been
we propose a variant of semantic entropy which we call ‘discrete’ seman- correct. This requires access to a dataset of ground-truth answers to the
tic entropy. Discrete semantic entropy approximates P(C i∣x) directly questions. Rather than fine-tuning the entire LLM in this way, we simply
take the final hidden units and train a logistic regression classifier to Metrics and accuracy measurements. We use three main metrics to
make the same prediction. By contrast to their method, this is much evaluate our method: AUROC, rejection accuracy and AURAC. Each of
simpler because it does not require fine-tuning the entire language these is grounded in an automated factuality estimation measurement
model, as well as being more reproducible because the solution to the relative to the reference answers provided by the datasets that we use.
logistic regression optimization problem is not as seed-dependent as AUROC, rejection accuracy and AURAC. First, we use the AUROC
the fine-tuning procedure. As expected, this supervised approach per- curve, which measures the reliability of a classifier accounting for both
forms well in-distribution but fails when the distribution of questions precision and recall. The AUROC can be interpreted as the probability
is different from that on which the classifier is trained. that a randomly chosen correct answer has been assigned a higher con-
The second baseline we consider is the P(True) method24, in which fidence score than a randomly chosen incorrect answer. For a perfect
the model first samples M answers (identically to our semantic entropy classifier, this is 1.
approach) and then is prompted with the list of all answers generated Second, we compute the ‘rejection accuracy at X%’, which is the
followed by the highest probability answer and a question whether question-answering accuracy of the model on the most-confident
this answer is “(a) True” or “(b) False”. The confidence score is then X% of the inputs as identified by the respective uncertainty method.
taken to be the probability with which the LLM responds with ‘a’ to the If an uncertainty method works well, predictions on the confident
multiple-choice question. The performance of this method is boosted subset should be more accurate than predictions on the excluded
with a few-shot prompt, in which up to 20 examples from the training subset and the rejection accuracy should increase as we reject
set are randomly chosen, filled in as above, but then provided with the more inputs.
actual ground truth of whether the proposed answer was true or false. To summarize this statistic we compute the AURAC—the total
In this way, the method can be considered as supervised ‘in-context’ area enclosed by the accuracies at all cut-off percentages X%. This
because it makes use of some ground-truth training labels but can should increase towards 1 as given uncertainty method becomes
be used without retraining the model. Because of context-size con- more accurate and better at detecting likely-inaccurate responses
straints, this method cannot fit a full 20 few-shot examples in the but it is more sensitive to the overall accuracy of the model than the
context when input questions are long or large numbers of genera- AUROC metric.
tions are used. As a result, we sometimes have to reduce the number In Supplementary Note 5, we provide the unaggregated rejection
of few-shot examples to suit the context size and we note this in the accuracies for sentence-length generations.
Supplementary Material. Assessing accuracy. For the short-phrase-length generation setting
presented in Supplementary Note 7, we simply assess the accuracy
Entailment estimator. Any NLI classification system could be used for of the generations by checking if the F1 score of the commonly used
our bidirectional entailment clustering algorithm. We consider two SQuAD metric exceeds 0.5. There are limitations to such simple scor-
different kinds of entailment detector. ing rules63 but this method is widely used in practice and its error is
One option is to use an instruction-tuned LLM such as LLaMA 2, GPT- comparatively small on these standard datasets.
3.5 (Turbo 1106) or GPT-4 to predict entailment between generations. For our default scenario, the longer sentence-length generations,
We use the following prompt: this measure fails, as the overlap between the short reference answer
We are evaluating answers to the question {question} and our long model answer is invariably too small. For sentence-length
Here are two possible answers: generations, we therefore automatically determine whether an answer
Possible Answer 1: {text1} to the question is correct or incorrect by using GPT-4 to compare the
Possible Answer 2: {text2} given answer to the reference answer. We use the template:
Does Possible Answer 1 semantically entail Possible Answer 2? We are assessing the quality of answers to the following question:
Respond with entailment, contradiction, or neutral. {question}
The expected answer is: {reference answer}
Alternatively, we consider using a language model trained for entail- The proposed answer is: {predicted answer}
ment prediction, specifically the DeBERTa-large model56 fine-tuned on Within the context of the question, does the proposed answer mean
the NLI dataset MNLI58. This builds on past work towards paraphrase the same as the expected answer? Respond only with yes or no.
identification based on embedding similarity59,60 and BERT-style
models61,62. We template more simply, checking if DeBERTa predicts We make a small modification for datasets with several reference
entailment between the concatenation of the question and one answers: line two becomes “The following are expected answers to this
answer and the concatenation of the question and another answer. question:” and the final line asks “does the proposed answer mean the
Note that DeBERTa-large is a relatively lightweight model with only same as any of the expected answers?”.
1.5B parameters which is much less powerful than most of the LLMs In Supplementary Note 6, we check the quality of our automated
under study. ground-truth evaluations against human judgement by hand. We find
In Supplementary Note 2, we carefully evaluate the benefits and that GPT-4 gives the best results for determining model accuracy and
drawbacks of these methods for entailment prediction. We settle on thus use it in all our sentence-length experiments.
using GPT-3.5 with the above prompt, as its entailment predictions
agree well with human raters and lead to good confabulation detec- Detecting confabulations in biographies
tion performance. In this section we describe the application of semantic entropy to
In Supplementary Note 3, we provide a discussion of the compu- confabulation detection in longer model generations, specifically
tational cost and choosing the number of generations for reliable paragraph-length biographies.
clustering. We introduce a biography-generation dataset—FactualBio—
available alongside this paper. FactualBio is a collection of biographies
Prompting templates. We use a simple generation template for all of individuals who are notable enough to have Wikipedia pages but not
sentence-length answer datasets: notable enough to have large amounts of detailed coverage, generated
Answer the following question in a single brief but complete by GPT-4 (v.0613). To generate the dataset, we randomly sampled 21
sentence. individuals from the WikiBio dataset64. For each biography, we gener-
Question: {question} ated a list of factual claims contained in each biography using GPT-4,
Answer: with 150 total factual claims (the total number is only coincidentally a
Article
round number). For each of these factual claims, we manually deter- We then compute the semantic entropy over these answers plus
mined whether the claim was correct or incorrect. Out of 150 claims, 45 the original factual claim. Including the original fact ensures that the
were incorrect. As before, we apply confabulation detection to detect estimator remains grounded in the original claim and helps detect
incorrect model predictions, even though there may be model errors situations in which the question has been interpreted completely dif-
which are not confabulations. ferently from the original context. We make a small modification to
handle the fact that GPT-4 generations often include refusals to answer
Prompting and generation. Given a paragraph-length piece of LLM- questions. These refusals were not something we commonly observe
generated text, we apply the following sequence of steps: in our experiments with LLaMA 2, Falcon or Mistral models. If more
1. Automatically decompose the paragraph into specific factual claims than half of the answers include one of the strings ‘not available’, ‘not
using an LLM (not necessarily the same as the original). provided’, ‘unknown’ or ‘unclear’ then we treat the semantic uncertainty
2. For each factual claim, use an LLM to automatically construct Q ques- as maximal.
tions which might have produced that claim. We then average the semantic entropies for each question corre-
3. For each question, prompt the original LLM to generate M answers. sponding to the factual claim to get an entropy for this factual claim.
4. For each question, compute the semantic entropy of the answers, Despite the extra assumptions and complexity, we find that this
including the original factual claim. method greatly outperforms the baselines.
5. Average the semantic entropies over the questions to arrive at a score
for the original factual claim. Entailment estimator. To compute semantic entailment between the
original claim and regenerated answers, we rely on the DeBERTa entail-
We pursue this slightly indirect way of generating answers because ment prediction model as we find empirically that DeBERTa predictions
we find that simply resampling each sentence creates variation unre- result in higher train-set AUROC than other methods. Because DeBERTa
lated to the uncertainty of the model about the factual claim, such as has slightly lower recall than GPT-3.5/4, we use a modified set-up for
differences in paragraph structure. which we say the answers mean the same as each other if at least one
We decompose the paragraph into factual claims using the follow- of them entails the other and neither is seen to contradict the other—
ing prompt: a kind of ‘non-defeating’ bidirectional entailment check rather than
true bidirectional entailment. The good performance of DeBERTa in
Please list the specific factual propositions included in the answer this scenario is not surprising as both factual claims and regenerated
above. Be complete and do not leave any factual claims out. Provide answers are relatively short. We refer to Supplementary Notes 2 and 3
each claim as a separate sentence in a separate bullet point. for ablations and experiments regarding our choice of entailment
estimator for paragraph-length generations.
We found that we agreed with the decompositions in all cases in
the dataset. Baselines. We implement two baselines. First, we implement a variant
We then generate six questions for each of the facts from the decom- of the P(True) method, which is adapted to the new setting. For each
position. We generate these questions by prompting the model twice factoid, we generate a question with answers in the same way as for
with the following: semantic entropy. We then use the following prompt:
Following this text: Question: {question}
{text so far} Here are some brainstormed ideas:
You see the sentence: {list of regenerated answers}
{proposition} Possible answer: {original answer}
Is the possible answer true? Respond with “yes” or “no”.
Generate a list of three questions, that might have generated the
sentence in the context of the preceding original text, as well as their As we cannot access the probabilities GPT-4 assigns to predicting
answers. Please do not use specific facts that appear in the follow-up ‘yes’ and ‘no’ as the next token, we approximate this using Monte Carlo
sentence when formulating the question. Make the questions and samples. Concretely, we execute the above prompt ten times (at tem-
answers diverse. Avoid yes-no questions. The answers should not be a perature 1) and then take the fraction of answers which was ‘yes’ as our
full sentence and as short as possible, e.g. only a name, place, or thing. unbiased Monte Carlo estimate of the token probability GPT-4 assigns
Use the format “1. {question} – {answer}”. to ‘yes’.
These questions are not necessarily well-targeted and the difficulty As a second, simpler, baseline we check if the model thinks the answer
of this step is the main source of errors in the procedure. We gener- is true. We simply ask:
ate three questions with each prompt, as this encourages diversity of Following this text:
the questions, each question targeting a different aspect of the fact. {text so far}
However, we observed that the generated questions will sometimes You see this statement:
miss obvious aspects of the fact. Executing the above prompt twice {proposition}
(for a total of six questions) can improve coverage. We also ask for Is it likely that the statement is true? Respond with ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
brief answers because the current version of GPT-4 tends to give long,
convoluted and highly hedged answers unless explicitly told not to. It is interesting that this method ought to perform very well if we think
Then, for each question, we generate three new answers using the that the model has good ‘self-knowledge’ (that is, if “models mostly
following prompt: know what they don’t know”24) but in fact semantic entropy is much
better at detecting confabulations.
We are writing an answer to the question “{user question}”. So far
we have written:
Data availability
{text so far}
The next sentence should be the answer to the following question: The data used for the short-phrase and sentence-length generations
{question} are publicly available and the released code details how to access it. We
Please answer this question. Do not answer in a full sentence. Answer release a public version of the FactualBio dataset as part of the code
with as few words as possible, e.g. only a name, place, or thing. base for reproducing the paragraph-length experiments.
61. He, R., Ravula, A., Kanagal, B. & Ainslie, J. Realformer: Transformer likes residual attention.
Code availability In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021
(eds Zhong, C., et al.) 929–943 (Assoc. Comp. Linguistics, 2021).
We release all code used to produce the main experiments. The code 62. Tay, Y. et al. Charformer: fast character transformers via gradient-based subword
for short-phrase and sentence-length experiments can be found at tokenization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
https://openreview.net/forum?id=JtBRnrlOEFN (2022).
github.com/jlko/semantic_uncertainty and https://doi.org/10.5281/
63. Kane, H., Kocyigit, Y., Abdalla, A., Ajanoh, P. & Coulibali, M. Towards neural similarity
zenodo.10964366 (ref. 65). The code for paragraph-length experiments evaluators. In Workshop on Document Intelligence at the 32nd conference on Neural
can be found at github.com/jlko/long_hallucinations and https://doi. Information Processing (2019).
64. Lebret, R., Grangier, D. & Auli, M. Neural text generation from structured data with
org/10.5281/zenodo.10964366 (ref. 65).
application to the biography domain. In Proc. 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (eds Su, J. et al.) 1203–1213 (Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2016).
46. Der Kiureghian, A. & Ditlevsen, O. Aleatory or epistemic? Does it matter? Struct. Saf. 31, 65. Kossen, J., jlko/semantic_uncertainty: Initial release v.1.0.0. Zenodo https://doi.org/
105–112 (2009). 10.5281/zenodo.10964366 (2024).
47. Malinin, A. & Gales, M. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations https://
openreview.net/forum?id=jN5y-zb5Q7m (2021). Acknowledgements We thank G. Irving, K. Perlin, J. Richens, L. Rimell and M. Turpin for their
48. Murray, K. & Chiang, D. Correcting length bias in neural machine translation. In Proc. comments or discussion related to this work. We thank K. Handa for his help with the human
Third Conference on Machine Translation (eds Bojar, O. et al.) 212–223 (Assoc. Comp. evaluation of our automated accuracy assessment. We thank F. Bickford Smith and L. Melo for
Linguistics, 2018). their code review. Y.G. is supported by a Turing AI Fellowship funded by the UK government’s
49. Holtzman, A., Buys, J., Du, L., Forbes, M. & Choi, Y. The curious case of neural text Office for AI, through UK Research and Innovation (grant reference EP/V030302/1), and
degeneration. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations delivered by the Alan Turing Institute.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH (2020).
50. Fan, A., Lewis, M. & Dauphin, Y. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proc. 56th Annual
Author contributions S.F. led the work from conception to completion and proposed using
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (eds Gurevych, I. & Miyao, Y.)
bidirectional entailment to cluster generations as a way of computing entropy in LLMs.
889–898 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018).
He wrote the main text, most of the Methods and Supplementary Information and prepared
51. Speaks, J. in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (ed. Zalta, E. N.) (Metaphysics
most of the figures. J.K. improved the mathematical formalization of semantic entropy; led
Research Lab, Stanford Univ., 2021).
the extension of semantic entropy to sentence- and paragraph-length generations; wrote the
52. Culicover, P. W. Paraphrase generation and information retrieval from stored text. Mech.
code for, and carried out, all the experiments and evaluations; wrote much of the Methods and
Transl. Comput. Linguist. 11, 78–88 (1968).
Supplementary Information and prepared drafts of many figures; and gave critical feedback
53. Padó, S., Cer, D., Galley, M., Jurafsky, D. & Manning, C. D. Measuring machine translation
on the main text. L.K. developed the initial mathematical formalization of semantic entropy;
quality as semantic equivalence: a metric based on entailment features. Mach. Transl. 23,
wrote code for, and carried out, the initial experiments around semantic entropy and its
181–193 (2009).
variants which demonstrated the promise of the idea and helped narrow down possible
54. Androutsopoulos, I. & Malakasiotis, P. A survey of paraphrasing and textual entailment
research avenues to explore; and gave critical feedback on the main text. Y.G. ideated the
methods. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 38, 135–187 (2010).
project, proposing the idea to differentiate semantic and syntactic diversity as a tool for
55. MacCartney, B. Natural Language Inference (Stanford Univ., 2009).
detecting hallucinations, provided high-level guidance on the research and gave critical
56. He, P., Liu, X., Gao, J. & Chen, W. Deberta: decoding-enhanced BERT with disentangled
feedback on the main text; he runs the research laboratory in which the work was carried out.
attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations https://openreview.
net/forum?id=XPZIaotutsD (2021).
57. Brown, T. et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, Competing interests S.F. is currently employed by Google DeepMind and L.K. by OpenAI. For
1877–1901 (2020). both, this paper was written under their University of Oxford affiliation. The remaining authors
58. Williams, A., Nangia, N. & Bowman, S. R. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence declare no competing interests.
understanding through inference. In Proc. 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies Additional information
(eds Walker, M. et al.) 1112–1122 (Assoc. Comp. Linguistics, 2018). Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
59. Yu, L., Hermann, K. M., Blunsom, P. & Pulman, S. Deep learning for answer sentence https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07421-0.
selection. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.1632 (2014). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Sebastian Farquhar.
60. Socher, R., Huang, E., Pennin, J., Manning, C. D. & Ng, A. Dynamic pooling and unfolding Peer review information Nature thanks Mirella Lapata and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s)
recursive autoencoders for paraphrase detection. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
on Neural Information Processing Systems (eds Shawe-Taylor, J. et al.) (2011) Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Algorithm outline for bidirectional entailment clustering. Given a set of outputs in response to a context, the bidirectional entailment
answer returns a set of sets of outputs which have been classified as sharing a meaning.